looking back at the cyberpunk blockbuster, the matrix is like a time
capsule and culmination of the science fiction movies of the 90`s. it`s
scenes and ideas have become iconic, and that makes it a classic,
although more because of its importance rather than it being a great
film in and of itself.

the matrix certainly has a technical brilliance that had a huge effect
on the way action movies were filmed. and unlike the deplorable shaky
cam aspects of the bourne movies, the style of the matrix at least made
the action movies that stole from it a little more visually pleasing.
the wachowski brothers certainly created a world that was fascinating
to think about and entertaining to watch. while their movie ends up not
going quite as far as it could and should have, they made a visually
groundbreaking movie that incorporates a lot of interesting and complex
philosophical ideas, although the movie doesn`t quite live up to the
ambitions it sets up for itself.

other movies from the 90`s had similar plots to this one, most notably
dark city, the truman show and strange days in the fact that the world
that we live in is far different that what it seems. the matrix is, of
course, a computer generated world simulating the world as it was in
1999, when in reality the year is closer to 2199, with all humans
plugged into the matrix, and used as batteries for sentient robots that
have taken over the world. that premise alone is enough to create a
good and interesting movie. the main character neo, however, also
happens to be the chosen one; the human that will end the war between
those humans that have woken up from the matrix and the machines that
want them dead. the interesting thing about the characters that have
woken up, is that they can plug back into the matrix when they need to.
and since they know they are in a virtual reality, they can manipulate
it to be great fighters and defy gravity and all that good stuff. neo,
being the chosen one, is thought to be able to manipulate the matrix
even more than the other enlightened ones.

keaunu reeves plays neo, in the same vein as harrison ford or bruce
willis, in that his acting is going out of his way to do not much at
all. this is fine enough, but since reeves lacks the charisma that ford
and willis posses, it makes it hard to really care about him as a
character. however, lawrence fishborne as morpheus, the wise and
powerful guru figure, is an excellent and enjoyable character. he gives
off the air of calmness and ease in a world that is controlled by fear
and chaos. carrie-anne moss is also excellent as trinity, the kick ass
chick that neo inevitably falls in love with. and there is also hugo
weaving, who plays agent smith, a program designed to look like a human
inside the matrix that is sent to kill all those humans that keep
trying to wake people up. he and the other agents have significant
abilities when it comes to altering the matrix. they can dodge bullets
with ease, and can easily fight any human. weaving is a highlight of
the movie, giving a memorable and vicious performance.

one of the most interesting aspects of this movie is the idea of making
a choice. this is most notably shown in the scene where neo has the
choice to take the blue pill, which will send him back to his bed and
he will never have to worry about what the matrix is, or the red pill,
which is akin to some form of psychedelic. neo takes the latter, and
becomes enlightened, waking up in a tub surrounded by other humans
plugged into the matrix. the direct effect of taking the red pill is
ambiguous, and creates a layer to the movie that makes it both more
interesting and more fun. choice shows up throughout the course of the
movie, especially with the oracle, a wise old lady who lives in the
matrix and predicted the coming of the chosen one to end the war
between man and machine.

neo then meets the characters on the flying ship the nebuchadnezzar,
including morpheus and trinity, as well as other characters that end up
being completely inconsequential considering they all die. the
character cypher, played by joe pantoliano is probably the worst of
these characters. he ultimately betrays the crew of the ship to agent
